Families should choose which languages to use with their child, says Jessica Messersmith, an audiologist at the University of South Dakota. But if their goal for a child with implants is spoken language, then “spoken language does need to be a primary input.” Messersmith co-authored the 2019 American Academy of Audiology clinical practice guidelines, which say parents should be informed about the full range of language options, but that “the likelihood of a child gaining high benefit in the areas of speech perception, speech production, and spoken language increases when more emphasis is placed on listening and spoken language.”

Many of the studies comparing how children fare when exposed only to speech or to speech and sign language are weak or flawed, a 2016 Pediatrics review concluded. But Messersmith and others point to an influential paper Geers and colleagues published the next year in Pediatrics. The study, done in 97 children with cochlear implants, found that those who had not been exposed to any kind of visual language—including ASL, as well as systems that mix signs with spoken language—had better speech outcomes than children with some visual language exposure.

It was not a controlled study, Geers emphasizes: To properly test the effects of different language choices, researchers would have had to randomly assign parents to use different language modalities with their children, which would be impossible in practice.

Hall and others had deeper reservations. They said that because the study grouped ASL with artificial communication systems that combine gestures and speech, it could say little about the effects of exposing children to a natural human signed language. They also argued the research couldn’t show that sign language actually caused the poorer outcomes. Parents could be more likely to use sign if their child struggles with speech, says Deborah Chen Pichler, a sign language linguist at Gallaudet University—so the causal arrow could point the other way: “Those children are probably signing because they weren’t progressing well in spoken language.”